---
title: Federal Zero Trust Strategy - Public Comment
layout: page
sidenav: true
permalink: /federal-zero-trust-strategy/
---

# Federal Zero Trust Strategy

The [Office of Management and Budget](https://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/) (OMB) is releasing a draft Federal Zero Trust Strategy in support of [Executive Order 14028, "Improving the Nation's Cybersecurity"](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-on-improving-the-nations-cybersecurity/), to adapt civilian agencies' enterprise security architecture to be based on zero trust principles.

The goal of this strategy is to accelerate agencies towards a **shared baseline of early zero trust maturity**. Moving to a zero trust architecture will be a multi-year journey for agencies, and the federal government will learn and adjust as new technologies and practices emerge.

Keep reading below, or **[download the Federal Zero Trust Strategy as a PDF](/downloads/Office of Management and Budget - Federal Zero Trust Strategy - DRAFT For Public Comment - 2021-09-07.pdf)**.

## How to comment

OMB welcomes feedback from the public on how this strategy can be improved to better strengthen the U.S. government's cybersecurity.

OMB is accepting public comment on the Federal Zero Trust Strategy through **September 21, 2021.** To submit a comment, send it by email to [zerotrust@omb.eop.gov](mailto:zerotrust@omb.eop.gov?subject=[Public%20comment]%20).


## Overview

The United States Government faces increasingly sophisticated and
persistent cyber threat campaigns that target its technology
infrastructure, threatening public safety and privacy, damaging the
American economy, and weakening trust in Government.

Every day, the Federal Government executes unique and deeply challenging
missions: agencies safeguard our nation's critical infrastructure,
conduct scientific research, engage in diplomacy, and provide benefits
and services for the American people, among many other public functions.
To deliver on these missions effectively, our nation must make
intelligent and vigorous use of modern technology and security
practices, while avoiding disruption by malicious cyber campaigns.

Successfully modernizing the Federal Government's approach to security
requires a Government-wide endeavor. In May of 2021, the President
issued [Executive Order (EO) 14028, *Improving the Nation's
Cybersecurity*](https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2021-10460), initiating a sweeping government-wide effort to
ensure that baseline security practices are in place, to migrate the
Federal Government to a zero trust architecture, and to realize the
security benefits of cloud-based infrastructure while mitigating
associated risks.

## Purpose

In the current threat environment, the Federal Government can no longer
depend on perimeter-based defenses to protect critical systems and data.
Meeting this challenge will require a major paradigm shift in how
Federal agencies approach cybersecurity.

As described in the [Department of Defense Zero Trust Reference Architecture](https://dodcio.defense.gov/Portals/0/Documents/Library/(U)ZT_RA_v1.1(U)_Mar21.pdf), *"*The foundational tenet of the Zero Trust Model is
that no actor, system, network, or service operating outside or within
the security perimeter is trusted. Instead, we must verify anything and
everything attempting to establish access. It is a dramatic paradigm
shift in philosophy of how we secure our infrastructure, networks, and
data, from verify once at the perimeter to continual verification of
each user, device, application, and transaction."

This strategy envisions a Federal zero trust architecture that:

-   Bolsters strong identity practices across Federal agencies;
-   Relies on encryption and application testing instead of perimeter
    security;
-   Recognizes every device and resource the Government has;
-   Supports intelligent automation of security actions; and
-   Enables safe and robust use of cloud services.

This strategy does not attempt to describe or prescribe a fully mature
zero trust implementation. Nor does it discourage any agency from going
beyond the actions described herein. The purpose of this strategy is to
put all Federal agencies on a common roadmap by laying out the initial
steps agencies must take to enable their journey toward a highly mature
zero trust architecture. This recognizes that each agency is currently
at a different state of maturity, and ensures flexibility and agility
for implementing required actions over a defined time horizon. The
strategy also seeks to achieve efficiencies for common needs by calling
for government-wide shared services, where relevant.

Transitioning to a
zero trust architecture will not be a quick or easy task for an
enterprise as complex and technologically diverse as the Federal
Government. But as President Biden stated in EO 14028, "Incremental
improvements will not give us the security we need; instead, the Federal
Government needs to make bold changes and significant investments in
order to defend the vital institutions that underpin the American way of
life."

## Goals

EO 14028 directs agencies to focus on meeting key baseline security
measures across the government, such as universal logging, multi-factor
authentication (MFA), reliable asset inventories, and ubiquitous use of
encryption, and to adopt a zero trust architecture.

To do this, the U.S. government's security architecture must avoid
implicit trust in devices and networks, assume networks and other
components will be compromised, and generally rely on the principle of
least privilege.

While the concepts behind zero trust architectures are not new, the
implications of shifting away from "trusted networks" are new to most
enterprises, including many Federal agencies. This will be a journey for
the Federal Government, and there will be learning and adjustments along
the way as agencies and policies adapt to new practices and
technologies.

Agencies that are further along in their zero trust process will need to
partner with those still beginning by exchanging information, playbooks,
and even staff. Agency chief financial officers, chief acquisition
officers, and others in agency leadership will need to work in
partnership with their IT and security leadership to build the
operational model to deploy and sustain zero trust capabilities.

This strategy encourages agencies to make use of the rich security
features present in cloud infrastructure, while ensuring that agency
systems are appropriately designed to support secure use of cloud
systems. This strategy frequently references cloud services, as agencies
are broadly expected to continue increasing their use of cloud
infrastructure and associated security services. However, the actions in
this strategy also address on-premise and hybrid systems.

This memorandum directs agencies to the highest-value starting points on
their path to a zero trust architecture, and describes several shared
services which should be prioritized to support a long-term
Government-wide effort.

This strategy is a starting point, not a comprehensive guide to a fully
mature zero trust architecture. Comprehensive maturity models and
reference architectures are listed in [References](#references), and agencies should
use them to plan and execute their long-term security architecture
migration plans.

### Required Actions

> Comment from cloud.gov: This strategy lists 19 actions, but has only listed 1 (phishing-resistant verifiers) as the top priority.

> For the other 18, unless OMB wants none of them complete for another 3 years, they should be in designated priority tiers. The nation's cybersecurity needs will be best met if the highest priority actions are completed sooner, and lower priority actions later.

> Or, OMB should direct agencies to adopt a WSJF prioritization process and direct them to complete first the actions that provide the highest value, in the least time, before moving on to other actions.

**This memorandum requires agencies to achieve specific zero trust
security goals by the end of Fiscal Year (FY) 2024**. Grouped using the
five pillars that underpin the [zero trust maturity model](https://cisa.gov/publication/zero-trust-maturity-model) of the
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), those goals
include:

1.  **Identity:** Agency staff use an enterprise-wide identity to access
    the applications they use in their work. Phishing-resistant MFA
    protects those personnel from sophisticated online attacks.

2.  **Devices:** The Federal Government has a complete inventory of
    every device it operates and authorizes for Government use, and can
    detect and respond to incidents on those devices.

3.  **Networks:** Agencies encrypt all DNS requests and HTTP traffic
    within their environment, and begin segmenting networks around their
    applications. The Federal Government identifies a workable path to
    encrypting email in transit.

4.  **Applications**: Agencies treat all applications as
    internet-connected, routinely subject their applications to rigorous
    testing, and welcome external vulnerability reports.

5.  **Data**: Agencies are on a clear, shared path to deploy protections
    that make use of thorough data categorization. Agencies are taking
    advantage of cloud security services to monitor access to their
    sensitive data, and have implemented enterprise-wide logging and
    information sharing.

EO 14028 required agencies to develop their own plans for implementing
zero trust architecture. **Within 60 days of the date of this
memorandum**, Departments and Agencies shall build upon those plans by
incorporating the additional requirements identified in this document,
and submitting to OMB an implementation plan for FY22-FY24 and a budget
estimate for FY23-24. Agencies should re-prioritize funding in FY22 to
achieve priority goals, or seek funding from alternative sources, such
as agency working capital funds or the Technology Modernization Fund.

**Departments and Agencies will have 30 days from the publication of
this memorandum** to designate and identify a zero trust architecture
implementation lead for their organization. OMB will rely on these
designated leads for government-wide coordination and for engagement on
planning and implementation efforts within each organization.

## Identity

### Vision

Agency staff use an enterprise-wide identity to access the applications
they use in their work. Phishing-resistant MFA protects those personnel
from sophisticated online attacks.[^4]

### Actions

1.  Agencies must establish a single sign-on (SSO) service for agency
    users that can be integrated into applications and common platforms,
    including cloud services.
2.  Agencies must enforce MFA at the application level, using enterprise
    SSO wherever feasible.
    -   For agency staff, contractors, and partners: phishing-resistant
        MFA is required.
    -   For public users: phishing-resistant MFA must be an option.
3.  Agencies must adopt secure password policies and check passwords
    against known-breached data.
    -   CISA will make available to agencies one or more services that
        can check passwords privately, without exposing those passwords.

Well-managed identity systems are at the foundation of a zero trust
architecture. Weak access controls allow adversaries to gain a foothold
in an organization through account takeover. At the same time, having
too many identity systems creates inconsistent security controls and
makes it challenging to reliably revoke access across an enterprise. To
ensure consistently strong access controls for users, agencies should
consolidate identity systems and federate access[^5] through their
agency and to other agencies as needed.

As Federal agencies broaden their use of MFA, their primary goal is to
defend their users not only from credential-theft, but also from
automated phishing attacks. This section describes a new baseline for
MFA implementation across the Government that prioritizes phishing
defense.

That baseline includes updated MFA requirements for public-facing
systems that will give more options to the general public. The security
of public-facing and internal systems is interconnected, and
phishing-resistant MFA becomes more usable and reliable for everyone
when it is universally available. However, universal access to public
services is of paramount importance, and agencies will retain
flexibility to ensure that their digital services can equitably serve
their intended users.

### 1. Enterprise-wide identity

The Federal Government must improve its identity systems and access
controls.

As agencies adopt cloud-based infrastructure and applications, they must
ensure the same level of strong authentication across various platforms.
The more separate account systems an agency operates, the more
challenging it is to implement strong authentication across the
enterprise, and the higher the burden on agency staff to manage
credentials across the various applications they need to use for their
jobs.

The simplest way for a Federal agency to address these challenges is to
support a single well-designed authentication system, and to integrate
it into as many applications as possible throughout the agency. For
large agencies with many different systems requiring user
authentication, consolidating identity systems will be a practical
necessity in order to implement some of the more sophisticated
protections required by this memorandum. In addition, several of the
other zero trust steps called for in this memorandum functionally
require enterprise SSO that can integrate at the application level.

**Agencies must employ an identity provider and enterprise-wide single
sign-on (SSO) service for agency users that can be integrated into
applications and common platforms, and begin decommissioning other
identity systems.** As a general matter, users should be able to sign in
once and then directly access other agency applications and platforms.
Consistent with zero trust and risk management principles, agencies can
apply additional authentication requirements or monitoring for access to
more sensitive applications. Such SSO services should use open
standards, such as SAML or OpenID Connect, and should be capable of
integration into externally operated cloud services as well as
agency-hosted applications. Agencies should review all applications used
across their enterprise with the goal of migrating away from any use of
non-SSO credentials in favor of the agency's primary SSO service.

Agencies should aim ultimately to use a single identity system that
serves all internal users. Agencies may have divisions or components
that need to use their own identity systems to meet their own distinct
mission needs. When an agency component needs a separate identity system
from their parent agency, that component must consolidate around a
single identity system. This identity system must be able to support the
federation of that component's users throughout other identity systems
in their agency, and must accept federated identities from an
agency-wide identity system.

### 2. Multi-factor authentication and resisting phishing

Strong authentication is a necessary component of a zero trust
architecture, and MFA will be a critical part of the Federal
Government's security baseline.

**Federal agencies must develop implementation plans to integrate and
enforce MFA** across applications involving authenticated access by
agency staff, contractors, and partners.[^6] [^7]

MFA should be integrated at the application layer, such as through an
enterprise SSO service as described above, rather than through network
authentication (e.g., a VPN). Approaching an application from a
particular network must not be considered any less risky than
approaching it from the public internet. Agencies must steadily
de-emphasize network-level authentication by their users, and eventually
remove it entirely in their enterprise. In mature zero trust
deployments, users log into applications, not into networks.

MFA will generally protect against some common methods of gaining
unauthorized account access, such as guessing weak passwords or reusing
passwords obtained from a data breach. However, many approaches to
multi-factor authentication will not protect against sophisticated
phishing attacks, which can convincingly spoof official applications and
involve dynamic interaction with users. Users can be fooled into
providing a one-time code or responding to a security prompt that grants
the attacker account access. These attacks can be fully automated and
operate cheaply at significant scale.

Fortunately, there are phishing-resistant approaches to MFA that can
defend against these attacks. The Federal Government's Personal Identity
Verification (PIV) standard is one such approach, and so will help many
agency systems meet this baseline. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)'s
open "Web Authentication" standard,[^8] another effective approach, is
supported today by nearly every major consumer device and an increasing
number of popular cloud services. Any other authentication protocol that
meets NIST SP 800-63B's definition of "verifier impersonation-resistant"
will also resist the kind of phishing described above.

**Agency systems must require internal users to use a phishing-resistant
method to access their accounts**. For routine self-service access by
agency staff, contractors, and partners, agency systems must discontinue
support for authentication methods that fail to resist phishing, such as
protocols that register phone numbers for SMS or voice calls, supply
one-time codes, or receive push notifications.

This requirement for phishing-resistant protocols is necessitated by the
reality that enterprise users are among the most valuable targets for
phishing, but can be given phishing-resistant tokens, such as PIV cards,
and be trained in their use. For many agency systems, PIV or derived PIV
will be the simplest way to support this requirement. However, agencies'
highest priority should be to rapidly implement a requirement for
phishing-resistant verifiers, whether this is PIV or an alternative
method, such as WebAuthn.

It is expected that emergency situations and human-assisted account
recovery processes will create an occasional need for weaker forms of
authentication. Any use of non-phishing-resistant authentication must be
exceptional and requires CIO approval, sufficient monitoring, and
periodic reconsideration.

### 3. Public-facing authentication

This memorandum focuses primarily on the internal enterprise security
posture of Federal agencies. However, the security of enterprise and
public authentication are interconnected. Many of the same technologies
are used for authentication across both enterprise and public systems,
fostering interoperability and user familiarity and improving security
across the board.

In addition, some Federal systems, such as those that process pre-hire
background investigations or the financial information of government
contractors, may be technically public-facing, yet have significant,
direct impacts on the operation and security of the Government.

Many systems serving the general public are not yet able to rely on
phishing-resistant authentication in providing users access to online
services. Some users of online government services may only have access
to a landline, and may not have a cell phone or smart phone.

At the same time, online public services are a major target for phishing
attacks and account takeover, and many users will expect government
services to give them tools they can use to protect themselves. To
equitably balance security and usability, public-facing government
systems need to offer users more options for authentication.

To that end, **public-facing agency systems that support MFA must give
users the option of using phishing-resistant authentication. Because
most of the general public will not have a PIV or CAC card, agencies
will have to meet this requirement by providing support for Web
Authentication-based approaches, such as security keys.**

### 4. Using strong password policies

Not all Federal systems use passwords &mdash; but when passwords are in use,
they are a "factor" in multi-factor authentication. If outdated password
requirements lead agency staff to reuse passwords from their personal
life, store passwords insecurely, or otherwise use weak passwords,
attackers will find it much easier to obtain unauthorized account access
&mdash; even within a system that uses MFA.

**Agency systems must remove password policies that require special
characters and regular password rotation from all systems, whether
internal or public-facing.** These requirements have long been [known to
lead to weaker passwords in real-world use](https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/blogs/techftc/2016/03/time-rethink-mandatory-password-changes) and should not be
employed by the Federal Government. These policies should be removed as
soon as is practical and should not be contingent on adopting other
protections described in this document or elsewhere. Agencies should
refer to NIST SP 800-63B for guidance on requiring passwords or
passphrases of appropriate length and other recommended practices.

**CISA will identify or make available to agencies one or more services
to privately compare user passwords against known-weak and
known-breached data**, to help agencies protect against reused stolen
credentials**.**[^10] These shared services should be operated such that
they cannot discern which passwords are being checked.[^11] CISA should
be responsive to agencies who wish to use new and emerging services for
this function, to keep pace in an evolving security landscape. CISA
should also consider using known-breached account information associated
with official government email accounts to verify whether breached
passwords are currently in use on relevant government systems.

**Agency systems must use one of the services identified or made
available by CISA to check user passwords against sets of known-weak and
known-breached passwords.** Since agencies should not store passwords in
plaintext, these comparisons can generally only occur when the user
enters a password, such as during account creation or login. For
particularly sensitive systems, agencies should proactively reset
passwords for privileged accounts to ensure that they have been checked.

## Devices

### Vision

The Federal Government has a complete inventory of every device it
operates and authorizes for Government work, and can detect and respond
to incidents on those devices.

### Actions

1.  Agencies must participate in CISA's Continuous Diagnostics and
    Mitigation (CDM) program.
    -   CISA will ground the CDM program upon the principle of least
        privilege, and prioritize effective operation in cloud-based
        infrastructure.

2.  Agencies must ensure that every human-operated
    enterprise-provisioned device has an agency-chosen endpoint
    detection and response (EDR) tool.
    -   CISA will work with agencies to fill gaps in EDR coverage.
    -   Agencies must provide CISA with ongoing access to EDR data.

To enforce a zero trust architecture, agencies must monitor and assess
the security posture of all of their authorized devices. As agencies
make greater use of cloud services, their assets naturally grow and
become more spread out across the internet.

Agencies must know what they have and where they are vulnerable, whether
in-house or in the cloud, in order to successfully monitor and improve
the security of their endpoints, servers, and other key technical
assets.

### 1. Inventorying assets

CISA operates the Continuous Diagnostics and Mitigation (CDM) program,
which provides a suite of services in support of improved detection and
monitoring of agency assets. The CDM program is a foundational element
of the Federal Government's approach to situational awareness in a zero
trust architecture. As directed by EO 14028, **Federal civilian agencies
must formalize their participation in CDM via a memorandum of agreement
with DHS.**

As CDM participation grows, it will become even more important to
structure CDM itself in accordance with zero trust principles. **CISA
must assume that its own monitoring infrastructure could become
compromised and adjust the CDM program accordingly**. To do this, CISA
must design and adapt CDM to require minimal privileges and avoid the
use of privileged software agents wherever possible. CISA must also work
with agencies to enforce strict privilege constraints on any CDM tools
operating in agency environments.

This is especially practical in cloud environments with rich, granular,
and dynamic permission systems. CISA must design the CDM program to
natively support Internet of Things (IoT) devices and a cloud-oriented
Federal architecture.

### 2. Government-wide endpoint detection and response

EO 14028 emphasizes the importance of proactive detection of
cybersecurity incidents, and the need for government-wide "hunt"
capabilities during incident response. EO 14028 requires CISA to make
recommendations to OMB on implementing an endpoint detection and
response (EDR) initiative, and OMB to issue guidance to Federal civilian
agencies after receiving those recommendations.

To ensure government-wide EDR coverage, **agencies must ensure strong
EDR tools are deployed across their agency.** Agencies with robust EDR
tools in place will continue to operate those tools, while agencies that
lack them will work with CISA to procure them. To enable government-wide
incident response, **agencies must establish information sharing
capabilities with CISA, implemented in accordance with upcoming OMB
guidance*.***

Agencies should anticipate establishing procedures and technical
facilities to make information reported from their EDR tools available
to CISA. This approach is intended to maintain a diversity of different
EDR tools throughout the government that can support agencies in
differing technological environments, while ensuring a baseline of
insight into activity across the Federal civilian government.

## Networks

### Vision

Agencies encrypt all DNS requests and HTTP traffic within their
environment, and begin segmenting networks around their applications.
The Federal Government identifies a workable path to encrypting email in
transit.

### Actions

1.  Agencies must resolve DNS queries using encrypted DNS wherever it is
    technically supported.
    -   CISA's Protective DNS program will support encrypted DNS
        requests.

2.  Agencies must enforce HTTPS for all web and application program
    interface (API) traffic in their environment.
    -   CISA will work with agencies to "preload" their .gov domains
        into web browsers as only accessible over HTTPS.

3.  CISA will work with FedRAMP to evaluate [MTA-STS](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8461.html) as a viable
    government-wide solution for encrypted email and to make resulting
    recommendations to OMB.

4.  Agencies must develop a network segmentation plan in consultation
    with CISA and submit it to OMB.

A key tenet of a zero trust architecture is that no network is
implicitly considered trusted, and accordingly, all traffic is encrypted
and authenticated. This includes internal traffic, as made clear in EO
14028, which directs that all data must be encrypted while in transit.

This strategy focuses agencies in the near-term on DNS and HTTP traffic.
CISA and FedRAMP will evaluate whether MTA-STS can be a viable, and
potentially automatable, path to reliably encrypt email in transit.

As agencies broadly encrypt traffic, they will need to balance the depth
of their network monitoring against presenting an excessive attack
surface. A key zero trust principle is assuming that any component can
be compromised, including monitoring services. Agencies should minimize
opportunities for adversaries to gain the ability to view or modify
traffic.

For example, agencies should avoid relying on static keys with overly
broad ability to decrypt enterprise-wide traffic, as the theft of such a
key would defeat encryption across the agency. Agencies should make
heavy internal use of recent versions of standard encryption protocols,
such as TLS 1.3, that are designed to resist bulk decryption.

This means that in practice, as NIST describes in SP 800-207,[^13] there
may be places where network traffic cannot be deeply inspected. This
network traffic can still be analyzed using visible metadata, machine
learning techniques, and other heuristics for detecting anomalous
activity. In places where deep traffic inspection is necessary and worth
the attack surface, agencies can employ active proxies whose visibility
and privileges are constrained to the least necessary to do their jobs.

### 1. Encrypting DNS traffic

DNS requests are foundational to the operation of enterprise IT and
contain data that should be difficult for attackers to intercept or
tamper with.

Like many protocols designed in the early days of the internet, DNS
requests have traditionally been unencrypted.[^14] This has allowed
organizations to monitor DNS within their environments through passive
network inspection. Unfortunately, this allows adversaries many vantage
points within an agency environment to perform this monitoring as well.

In recent years, updated standards for encrypting DNS requests have
emerged and become widely adopted. Agencies can now adjust their DNS
architecture and associated monitoring to move closer to a zero trust
architecture.

**Agencies must resolve DNS queries using encrypted DNS wherever it is
technically supported.** This means that agency DNS resolvers must
support standard encrypted DNS protocols (DNS-over-HTTPS or
DNS-over-TLS), and must use them to communicate with upstream DNS
resolvers. Agency endpoints must enable encrypted DNS in supporting
applications (e.g., web browsers), and at the operating system level
wherever these features are available.[^15] If agencies use
custom-developed software to initiate DNS requests, they must implement
support for encrypted DNS. Agencies can continue to identify and log the
contents of encrypted DNS requests by accessing this information at the
agency's designated DNS resolvers.

Agencies are already required to have DNS requests route through
CISA-operated infrastructure. To support secure agency DNS traffic,
**CISA's Protective DNS offering will support encrypted DNS
communication**, and will scale to accommodate use from agency cloud
infrastructure and mobile endpoints.

### 2. Encrypting HTTP traffic

HTTP is the core protocol used for serving applications to web browsers,
whether these applications are public or internal-facing. However,
beyond user-visible websites, HTTP is also commonly used for many APIs
between servers, mobile applications, and other endpoints.

Agencies have already been required by OMB Memorandum M-15-13 and
Binding Operational Directive (BOD) 18-01 to use HTTPS, the encrypted
form of HTTP, across all internet-accessible web services and APIs. Zero
trust architectures require agencies to encrypt internal traffic as
well.

**Agencies must enforce HTTPS for all production HTTP traffic, including
traffic that does not cross the public internet.** OMB Memorandum
M-15-13 and BOD 18-01 require agencies to enforce HTTPS, but only
applied to internet-accessible systems. Agencies must now encrypt all
HTTP traffic within their environments.

To ensure this is complete, and to strengthen .gov as a top-level
domain, **agencies must "preload" agency-owned .gov domains as
HTTPS-only in web browsers.** Internet domain names can be "preloaded"
in web browsers so that those browsers will only access services using
those domain names over HTTPS. There are significant security benefits
to enforcing HTTPS client-side and domain-wide, and since 2020, the
DotGov program has coordinated with web browsers to automatically
preload all newly registered .gov domains.

However, many preexisting agency .gov domains have not been
preloaded.[^16] The most significant barrier to doing so has been the
presence of "intranet" websites that use publicly registered .gov
domains but do not support HTTPS. As agencies encrypt their internal
traffic as part of adopting a zero trust architecture, this barrier will
be removed and agencies will be able to safely preload their domains
without risking breakage.

More generally, the .gov top-level domain has announced an intent to
eventually [preload the entirety of the .gov domain space as an
HTTPS-only zone](https://home.dotgov.gov/2020/6/21/an-intent-to-preload/). This change would improve the security and zero
trust posture of government institutions throughout the United States
that make use of .gov for their enterprise services. However, Federal
agencies will need to do their part to encrypt internal HTTP traffic to
minimize breakage and make this transition possible.

### 3. Encrypting email traffic

It remains challenging today to easily and reliably encrypt an email all
the way between any sender and any recipient. Unlike HTTP and DNS, there
is not today a clear path forward for guaranteeing that Federal emails
are encrypted in transit, particularly for emails with external
parties.[^18]

However, email remains a critical method of communication and
authentication in the operation of everyday life in the Federal
Government. There is no other widely adopted, open, and interoperable
standard for cross-organization communication today. We must make
progress in this space. Since emails to, from, and within the Federal
Government are sent and received by a tremendous diversity of clients
and service providers, any solution will necessarily be based on open
standards.

One promising open internet standard for securing emails in transit is
[MTA-STS](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8461.html), which allows enterprises to publish policies online that
instruct global mail servers to strictly enforce encryption for their
emails. MTA-STS is seeing some adoption by major cloud email providers,
but is not universally supported among mail relays, and its security
policies can be technically challenging for organizations to deploy.

**CISA will evaluate the viability of MTA-STS as a government-wide
solution for encrypted email and make recommendations to OMB to inform
future government-wide actions.** As part of its evaluation, CISA should
partner with FedRAMP to convene and consult with cloud service providers
and other participants in the email ecosystem. In addition, CISA should
determine the viability of deploying MTA-STS automatically for .gov
domain registrants.[^20]

### 4. Segmenting networks around applications

Agencies should be moving towards an end state where every distinct
application they run is in its own separate network environment.
Multiple applications may rely on specific shared services for security
or other purposes, but should not rely on being co-located within a
network with those services and should be prepared to create secure
connections between them across untrusted networks.

**Agencies must develop an implementation plan to segment their networks
around individual applications, in consultation with CISA, and include
it in the full implementation and investment plan required by this
memorandum.** This segmentation plan should describe the agency's
strategic approach to transitioning their network architecture,
including how the agency will employ network virtualization and
automated configuration management to easily replicate network security
controls.

## Applications

### Vision

Agencies treat their applications as internet-connected, routinely
subject them to rigorous empirical testing, and welcome external
vulnerability reports.

### Actions

1.  Agencies must operate dedicated application security testing
    programs.

2.  Agencies must utilize high-quality firms specializing in application
    security for independent third-party evaluation.
    -   CISA and GSA will work together to make such firms available for
        rapid procurement.

3.  Agencies must maintain an effective and welcoming public
    vulnerability disclosure program.
    -   CISA will provide a vulnerability disclosure platform that makes
        it easy for agency system owners to receive reports directly and
        engage with security researchers.

4.  Agencies must identify at least one internal-facing FISMA Moderate
    application and make it accessible over the public internet, using
    enterprise SSO.

5.  CISA and GSA will work together to provide agencies with data about
    their online applications and other assets.
    -   Agencies must provide any non-.gov hostnames they use to CISA
        and GSA.

Zero trust architectures emphasize putting protections as close as
possible to the data and operations being protected. Applications are
the front-facing attack surface of federal systems, and as system
components they are usually necessarily authorized to have broad data
access.

At the same time, agencies cannot rely on network perimeter protections
to guard their applications from unauthorized access. In the long-term,
consistent with CISA's zero trust maturity model, agencies will be
expected to stop requiring that access to applications come from
specific networks. This means that, as described in the Identity section
above, authentication will be done at the application layer, and
applications will generally be accessible over the public internet. **In
the near-term, every application should be treated as
internet-accessible.**

More generally, to protect applications from attack, agencies need to
see their applications as their adversaries see them. This means
bringing in external partners and independent perspectives to evaluate
the real-world security of agency applications, and welcoming the
coordinated disclosure of vulnerabilities by the general public.

To do this well, the government must have a complete understanding of
what applications agencies currently have online; this means using the
internet and the outside world as a reality check to find systems and
vulnerabilities that would otherwise be missed.

### 1.  Application security testing

For Federal applications to withstand sophisticated probing and attack,
agencies need to go beyond implementing and documenting security
controls. To gain confidence in the security of their systems, agencies
will need to analyze their software and its deployed functionality with
a comprehensive and rigorous approach, whether their software is built
internally or by a contracted vendor.

Agencies already create a Security Assessment Report (SAR) as part of
authorizing their information systems. These SARs should reflect not
only automated tools for code analysis of custom-developed software and
vulnerability scanning generally, but more time-intensive, specialized,
and application-specific analysis.

For example, running a scanner on a page with a web form to detect
common misconfigurations might be helpful, but would not be sufficient
to gain confidence in the security of that form. More thorough testing
could involve attempting to submit creatively invalid data, or
evaluating whether client-side validation logic is also consistently
validated on the server.

**Agency system authorization processes must employ both automated
analysis tools and manual expert analysis.** To understand the depth of
security analysis that agencies perform on applications prior to
authorization, OMB may at any time ask an agency to produce an
application's most recent security assessment. Agencies are expected to
continue moving towards continuous monitoring and ongoing
authorizations, while employing periodic manual security assessments as
applications evolve. Agencies must prioritize and address
vulnerabilities identified in their SAR through these methods.

As directed by EO 14028, NIST has developed [guidelines for developer
verification of software](https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/2021/07/13/Developer%20Verification%20of%20Software.pdf), which agencies should reference when
developing their application testing plans. However, NIST's guidance
describes a common baseline for many kinds of applications and does not
address specialized testing. Agencies will still need to engage in
specialized expert analysis of their applications, beyond evaluating
common application issues.

### 2.  Easily available third-party testing

In addition to their own testing programs, agencies will need to rely on
external perspectives to identify vulnerabilities that internal staff
may not consider.

To support agencies in achieving this, **CISA and GSA will collaborate
on creating a procurement structure for agencies that allows for rapid
acquisition of rigorous application security testing** and whose primary
goals should be quality and speed. As a result of this work, agencies
should be able to schedule most work within less than a month (or in
high-urgency situations, a few days).

### 3.  Welcoming application vulnerability reports

Public vulnerability disclosure programs, which allow security
researchers and other members of the general public to report security
issues safely, are used widely across the Federal Government and many
private sector industries. These programs are an invaluable
accompaniment to existing internal security programs, and operate as a
reality check on an organization's online security posture.

To ensure Federal agencies are able to receive vulnerability information
from the general public, OMB issued [Memorandum M-20-32](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/M-20-32.pdf), and CISA
published [Binding Operational Directive 20-01](https://cyber.dhs.gov/bod/20-01/). These actions
require agencies to publish security contact information, as well as a
clear and welcoming vulnerability disclosure policy (VDP).

**Agencies must welcome external vulnerability reports for every online
system they operate,** and structure reporting channels so that system
owners have direct, real-time access to incoming vulnerability reports.

To assist agencies, **[CISA has released a vulnerability disclosure
platform](https://bugcrowd.com/programs/organizations/cisa)** that Federal agencies may use to receive and triage
vulnerabilities and to engage directly with security researchers.

To avoid any issues that might hinder secure cloud adoption, **FedRAMP
will work with cloud platform providers to clarify that Federal agency
customers are permitted to authorize vulnerability testing** on
customer-operated applications and infrastructure on provider platforms.

### 4.  Safely making applications internet-accessible

Making applications internet-accessible in a safe manner, without
relying on a virtual private network (VPN) is a major shift for many
agencies that will take significant effort to achieve. However, as with
all large-scale IT modernization efforts, its chances of long-term
success will be improved by beginning with an agile approach.

To catalyze this work and to identify any obstacles early in an agency's
zero trust journey, **agencies must select at least one FISMA Moderate
system that requires authentication and is not currently
internet-accessible, and allow access over the internet**. This will
require agencies to create minimum viable monitoring infrastructure and
policy enforcement to safely allow internet access. This process should
also involve integration with their agency's enterprise-wide single
sign-on system, as described in the Identity section above. Agencies
will likely find it beneficial to gain confidence in their controls and
processes by first performing this shift on a FISMA Low system before
meeting the requirement of doing so for a FISMA Moderate system.

### 5.  Discovering internet-accessible applications

Zero trust architectures require a complete understanding of an
organization's internet-accessible assets, to apply security policies
consistently and to fully define and accommodate user workflows. In
practice, it can be very challenging for a large, decentralized
organization to track every asset reliably.

For agencies to maintain a complete understanding of what
internet-accessible attack surface they have, they must rely not only on
their internal records, but the reality of what can be found on the
internet.

To assist agencies, **CISA will provide agencies with data about their
internet-accessible assets as discovered by CISA and GSA through public
and private sources**. CISA and GSA will consult public and commercial
data based on internet scans and perform scanning themselves where
helpful. CISA and GSA will also consult other authoritative data
sources, such as .gov domain registrations and DNS request logs.

Through its operation of the [.gov DNS domain](https://home.dotgov.gov), CISA has access to an
authoritative and complete list of each agency's registered .gov
domains, but cannot learn of the agency's use of non-.gov domain names.
GSA operates a [website scanning service](https://digital.gov/guides/site-scanning/) that measures a variety of
useful properties, and relies on open source software collaboratively
maintained by CISA and GSA. GSA has also [historically tracked use of
Federal non-.gov web URLs](https://search.gov/developer/govt-urls.html), but agency participation in GSA's
efforts is voluntary and incomplete, and the data is limited to
websites.

To assist CISA and GSA, **agencies must provide to CISA and GSA, on an
ongoing basis, any non-.gov hostnames used by their internet-accessible
information systems.** CISA and GSA will work with agencies to define a
streamlined, sustainable, and mutually agreeable process that will meet
that requirement while minimizing manual effort among all participants
and ensuring long-term data quality.

## Data

### Vision

Agencies are on a clear, shared path to deploy protections that make use
of thorough data categorization. Agencies take advantage of cloud
security services and tools to discover, classify, and protect their
sensitive data, and have implemented enterprise-wide logging and
information sharing.

### Actions

1.  OMB will work with Federal chief data officers and chief information
    security officers to develop a zero trust data security strategy and
    associated community of practice.

2.  Agencies must perform some initial automation of data categorization
    and security responses, focusing on tagging and managing access to
    sensitive documents.

3.  Agencies must audit access to any data encrypted at rest in
    commercial cloud infrastructure.

4.  Agencies must work with CISA to implement comprehensive logging and
    information-sharing capabilities, as described in [OMB Memorandum
    M-21-31](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/M-21-31-Improving-the-Federal-Governments-Investigative-and-Remediation-Capabilities-Related-to-Cybersecurity-Incidents.pdf).

### 1.  Federal data security strategy

Developing a comprehensive, accurate approach to categorizing and
tagging data will be challenging for many agencies. While agencies have
been required to inventory their datasets for some time, a comprehensive
zero trust approach to data management requires going beyond what
agencies may be accustomed to thinking of as "datasets."

Agencies must not only develop protections for the packaged datasets
they store in databases or publish online, but must also grapple with
more loosely structured and dispersed data systems (such as email and
document collaboration) and intermediate datasets which exist
principally to support the maintenance of other primary datasets.

**To ensure engagement and progress on tackling this challenge, the
Federal Chief Data Officer (CDO) Council and the Federal Chief
Information Security Officer (CISO) Council will create a joint
committee on zero trust data security for Federal agencies, chaired by
OMB.** This committee will develop a data categorization and protection
guide for Federal agencies, and oversee a community of practice that can
assist agencies in tackling specific areas of focus. This committee will
consult with other Federal councils and key stakeholders during
development of this guide.

### 2.  Automating security responses

As agencies grapple with security events throughout their systems and
cloud infrastructure, automation of security monitoring and enforcement
will be a practical necessity. This capability is often referred to as
Security Orchestration, Automation, and Response (SOAR).

Making this sort of automation work in a large enterprise \-- measurably
improving security and efficiency without causing unacceptable
disruption to the daily work of the organization \-- will require
careful tuning, iteration, and sensitivity to business needs. For it to
be practical for an automated security system to operate with a mostly
hands-off approach, false positives and false negatives must be low.

At the same time, to successfully automate security events surrounding
data, systems for orchestration and permission management will need rich
information on the types of data being protected.

Agencies should strive to employ heuristics rooted in machine learning
to detect anomalous behavior or categorize the data they use throughout
their enterprise. However, machine learning models can be opaque and
complex to debug. Overseeing and configuring software that uses machine
learning requires specialized skillsets will take time to develop.

In the short-term, agencies will need to identify early candidates for
data sensitivity categorization and security automation that do not
require machine learning in order to be useful, and can be achieved
using simpler technical approaches, such as scripts or regular
expressions. Any automated actions should first be implemented in a
"report only" mode, where agency security teams monitor the performance
of their heuristics and the accuracy of their categorizations before
enabling any security actions that might impact staff workflow.

**To get started, agencies must leverage their chief data officer to
develop a set of initial categorizations for sensitive documents within
their enterprise, and automatically monitor and potentially restrict how
these documents are shared.**[^29] These categorizations are expected to
be developed manually and do not need to be complete, but should be
broad enough to be useful while being specific enough to be reliably
accurate.[^30] For example, an agency which uses a standard template for
procurement-sensitive documents could attempt to detect when this
template is in use. An agency could monitor for potentially excessive
sharing of this document when shared via collaboration tools or sent
through email. Depending on the characteristics of a document and the
features in an agency's collaboration suite, an agency could potentially
automate the restriction of permissions around viewing this document.

### 3.  Auditing access to sensitive data in the cloud

EO 14028 calls for agencies to use encryption to protect data at rest.
Encryption at rest can protect data that is copied while at rest, but
does not protect against access by compromised system components that
are authorized to decrypt data. However, cloud-based infrastructure
providers now offer a wide variety of services that support
cloud-managed encryption and decryption operations, with their own
associated logs.

By relying on cloud-operated infrastructure to manage keys and gate
access to decryption operations, agencies can still rely on the
trustworthiness of associated audit logs even if their own environment
is fully compromised. Leaning on third-party infrastructure to enforce
security constraints takes advantage of cloud security tools to
implement a stronger zero trust architecture, while also making for more
efficient use of agency resources.

**When agencies encrypt data at rest in the cloud, agencies must use
independently operated key management tools to create a trustworthy
audit log of access to that data.** This can be achieved by using key
management tools operated by the cloud provider, or by key management
tools that are on-premise or otherwise external to the agency-controlled
cloud environment. In either case, access to key management tools and
their audit logs must be isolated from the applications whose activity
is being logged. This requirement does not apply to data encrypted in
on-premise environments because they do not consistently have
third-party components available whose trustworthiness could be relied
upon in the event of a total agency compromise.

At advanced stages of maturity, agencies can combine these audit logs
with other sources of event data to employ more sophisticated approaches
to security monitoring. For example, agencies could compare the timing
of data access to the timing of user-initiated events to identify
database accesses that may not have been caused by normal application
activity.

### 4.  Timely access to logs

EO 14028 calls for decisive action to improve the Federal Government's
ability to investigate and recover from incidents and breaches, whether
these incidents occur in agency-owned infrastructure or in cloud
infrastructure maintained by a third-party provider.

Pursuant to EO 14028, and modeled on recommendations from CISA, OMB
issued [Memorandum M-21-31](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/M-21-31-Improving-the-Federal-Governments-Investigative-and-Remediation-Capabilities-Related-to-Cybersecurity-Incidents.pdf), "Improving the Federal Government's
Investigative and Remediation Capabilities Related to Cybersecurity
Incidents," to establish requirements for the retention and
management of logs in cloud-hosted and agency-operated environments.
This memo focuses on ensuring centralized access and visibility for the
highest-level security operations center (SOC) of each agency and on
increased information-sharing between agencies to accelerate incident
response and investigative efforts.

To help agencies prioritize their efforts, Memorandum M-21-31
establishes a tiered maturity model to guide agencies through the
implementation of requirements. This maturity model is designed to help
agencies balance the adoption of various requirements for
implementation, log categorization, improved SOC operation, and
centralized access.

**Agencies must reach the first incident logging maturity level (IL1) as
described in Memorandum M-21-31.** Among their first priorities,
agencies are expected to implement log integrity measures to limit
access and allow cryptographic verification, and to log DNS requests
made throughout their environment.

## References

The Federal Government has been preparing for the transition to a zero
trust architecture for some time. Several agencies have published
architectural models that can be helpful to other agencies:

-   [**CISA's Zero Trust Maturity Model**](https://cisa.gov/publication/zero-trust-maturity-model) is
    a high-level overview of zero trust "pillars" that shows how
    agencies may progress to "Advanced" and "Optimal" states, and
    describes how CISA service-offerings align to these pillars.

-   [**CISA's Cloud Security Technical Reference Architecture**](https://cisa.gov/publication/cloud-security-technical-reference-architecture),
    co-authored with the United States Digital Service and FedRAMP,
    provides a more granular reference for secure cloud architectures
    and migration strategies.

-   [**NIST's SP 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture**](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-207/final)
    provides a consensus definition and framework for the key tenets of
    zero trust architecture, while describing several different
    approaches to zero trust architecture that organizations with
    different risk postures and skillsets can adopt.

-   The NIST National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) has
    initiated [**"Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture,"**](https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/zero-trust-architecture)
    a collaboration with industry partners to apply the concepts in NIST
    SP 800-207 to a conventional enterprise architecture.

-   [**GSA's Zero Trust Architecture Buyer's Guide**](https://www.gsa.gov/cdnstatic/Zero%20Trust%20Architecture%20Buyers%20Guide%20v11%2020210610%20(2).pdf)
    can help agencies identify GSA contract vehicles that offer products
    and services relevant to agency zero trust implementations.

-   [**The Department of Defense's Zero Trust Reference Architecture**](https://dodcio.defense.gov/Portals/0/Documents/Library/(U)ZT_RA_v1.1(U)_Mar21.pdf)
    comprehensively describes potential security features and
    architectural controls that the Department plans to execute across
    its systems.





[^4]: In this document, "phishing-resistant\" authentication refers to<br/>
    the definition of "verifier-impersonation resistant" authentication<br/>
    from [NIST Special Publication 800-63-3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63b.html#verifimpers).


[^5]: NIST [defines "federation" in SP 800-63-3](https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-3/sp800-63-3.html#federation) as "A process that allows<br/>
    the conveyance of identity and authentication information across a<br/>
    set of networked systems."<br/>
    For example, federation can allow an agency's staff to use their<br/>
    enterprise identity to sign into another agency's systems, if both<br/>
    agencies support it.

[^6]: The term "partners" is meant to include users that are external to<br/>
    the agency, but whose use of agency systems requires a strong form<br/>
    of MFA. For example, this category could include non-Federal<br/>
    registrants of .gov domains, or government contractors submitting<br/>
    financial information. Agencies will need to determine the scope of<br/>
    this category based on their own systems and missions.

[^7]: For clarity, Privileged Access Management (PAM) solutions may not<br/>
    substitute for multi-factor authentication when authenticating human<br/>
    users to a system.

[^8]: [Web Authentication](https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/), also known as WebAuthn, is published as a free<br/>
    and open standard.


[^10]: CISA [currently performs this practice](https://home.dotgov.gov/2018/4/17/increase-security-passwords/) for one of its own<br/>
    information systems, the DotGov registrar.

[^11]: [An example of such a privacy-preserving approach](https://blog.cloudflare.com/validating-leaked-passwords-with-k-anonymity/).


[^13]: [NIST SP 800-207](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-207.pdf), section 5.4, p. 29.

[^14]: DNSSEC does not encrypt DNS data in transit. DNSSEC can be used<br/>
    to verify the integrity of a resolved DNS query, but does not<br/>
    provide confidentiality.

[^15]: Windows 11 is [currently expected to support DNS-over-HTTPS](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/networking-blog/windows-insiders-gain-new-dns-over-https-controls/ba-p/2494644).

[^16]: Preloading of agency .gov domains was referenced by OMB<br/>
    Memorandum M-15-13 and [encouraged in implementation guidance](https://https.cio.gov/guide/#options-for-hsts-compliance), but<br/>
    was not required at issuance.


[^18]: The most common standard for email transit encryption today,<br/>
    STARTTLS, is "opportunistic", meaning that an attacker can interfere<br/>
    with the secure connection and cause emails to be sent unencrypted.<br/>
    Attacks have been observed at scale on the public internet.

[^20]: Security expert Andrew Ayer describes a [potential approach](https://www.agwa.name/blog/post/mta_sts_automation) to<br/>
    automating MTA-STS for customers of DNS providers.


[^29]: Agencies are encouraged to participate in the NIST NCCoE's<br/>
    [project to examine different approaches to data categorization](https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/data-classification) and<br/>
    the implementation of protections based on those categorizations.

[^30]: For example, detecting documents containing Social Security<br/>
    Numbers simply by looking for 9 digits in a row is unlikely to be<br/>
    reliably accurate.
